In our continuing examination of the race riots in Wales in 1919, this chapter relates
to the race riots in Barry in 1919.
First of all there is a need to be clear. The race riots were direct attacks by hundreds
of white men, mainly men, on black people. They attacked them in the street, chasing
and pursuing, then beating them if they could, and they burnt down and ransacked their homes
and lodging houses. In Cardiff white women living with black men were stripped and beaten
by the mob. The first of the race riots actually broke out in Newport on 6th June when it was
alleged that a black man had made an insulting remark to a white woman. A white soldier then
attacked him. Violence quickly flared as an angry mob of white people began attacking at
random or perceived non-white people, who then began responding in kind with whatever
they had to hand, including sticks, posters, pokers, razors, knives and in some cases revolvers.
The Nottingham Evening Post, 12th June 1919. Fatal Afray in Barry. A soldier named Henry
Longman, aged 30, was fatally stabbed in the street in Barrylast. A negro is detained in
connection with the soldier's death. Crowds of white men and women surrounded the police
station. They were dispersed, but disturbance followed in various many streets where men
of colour were known to reside. Windows were smashed and property damaged.
Western Mail, 12th June 1919. Barry riots started because, quote, the black way laid
him, Fred Longman, seized him by the throat, pinned him against the wall and stabbed him
under the heart. According to court records, a witness, Louisa Richards, coloured woman
married to a coloured man now at sea who lived at 17 Beverley Street but now lives at Harvey
Street, said Longman was standing in his doorway when prisoner Charles Emmanuel and another
coloured man entered the street. Prisoners spoke to the witness and the other man walked
on. Longman came up and asked, Emmanuel, can't you find a street of your own to walk in?
Emmanuel replied that he was not doing any harm, whereupon Longman struck him. A struggle
ensued and Longman was pinned up against a wall. Two men came across and one man struck
Emmanuel with his fist. The other man got a poker and Emmanuel, who relaxed his hold
of Longman, pulled out a knife. Louisa Richards saw Longman make another dart at the prisoner
and Longman then staggered and fell bleeding. Although she was only a few miles away, she
said she did not see Emmanuel actually stab Longman. This was a time when violence and
crime were entirely normal parts of people's lives, especially in docks towns. Frederick
Longman was a convicted thief and had also been arrested for assaulting a police officer.
This continued during his service in the army, during which time he was charged with various
offences by the army. He had served as a driver in World War I but had been discharged in
February 1919 after suffering from dysentery. Although the papers described him as a soldier,
all that actually meant was that he was in the discharge period when he would have been
receiving insurance payments after leaving the army. He was not in fact a serving soldier
and his pension would have run out on October 19. He was a resident of Fairford Street,
Haddockston for at least 10 years and he left a wife and three young children. Charles
Emmanuel was a fireman, a merchant seamen working below decks and as he operated from
Barry Docks he would also have been directly involved in World War I. We cannot now say
who started the fight between Emmanuel and Longman and others, but we know that 36-year-old
Frederick Longman was killed and Emmanuel was arrested. At Swansea Town Hall of Sizes,
45-year-old French Caribbean seamen Charles Emmanuel was charged on the 22nd of July 1919
that he did quote, willfully and of malice of Thorford kill and murder one Frederick
Henry Longman, unquote. However, murder was not proven and Emmanuel received a sentence
of manslaughter with a prison term of five years.
Western Mail 13th June 1919. Scenes at Barry. Houses damaged, but no personal violence.
There was a slight renewal of outbreaks at Barry on Thursday, the paper says. Excited
crowds settled in the streets of Haddockston and the home of many of the coloured seamen
were visited. Damage was done to the houses by the smashing of windows, etc. But fortunately
the strong form of police available, together with the heavy rains which fell, damped the
ardour of the crowd and eventually prevented anything like a serious disturbance. And but
little personal violence was indulged in. What might have developed into an ugly incident
was prevented by the prompt action of the police. It appears that about 50 workmen early
in the afternoon went to a fish and chip shop in Holton Road which is kept by a woman whose
husband is a negro. A large crowd gathered on the scene but the police had been sent
and formed a cordon. They prevented the workmen from entering the premises and carry out their
threats of molesting the coloured men. Murder charge. Further arrests. Three coloured men
were arrested at Haddockston on Thursday for having small arms and other dangerous
weapons of offence in their possession and they will also come up for trial today. The
violence against black seamen was to continue for a few more days during which Tyrone Ernest
Jackman was chased from his home in Beverley Street by a mob. Jackman had served through
the war in France with the Queen's rifle. He was arrested by the police on the 11th
of June and sent to court and found guilty of wounding John Goldsworthy. He was fined
£10 and told to be of good behaviour for 12 months. As tensions rose some of the wives
of black seamen took their children and went to stay with family and friends in the Rhondda
Valley until their husbands returned from sea and things calmed down. As with other
areas the local authorities and government tried to persuade black seamen to accept repatriation,
a free boat ride home, a one way journey. This was not accepted in Barry, especially
as many men had families and this may be the point at which they actually decided to become
British, choosing family over land of their birth. In fact a number of them, like Leonard
Hines, chose to leave the sea and become miners. The events of June 1919 in Barry are
not common knowledge locally and little has been written about them in the 100 years since.
Only recently has this secret history been publicised but it is still not the topic of
school work which is a shame for many reasons, not least because the grandchildren and great
grandchildren of that generation do not know that the black seamen and soldiers and white
wives clearly made a decision to remain in Barry and Wales which is the reason those
young relatives are citizens of Wales.